Hi, Anton! Let's keep ising also this channel with Sulev. About SNOMED - Sulev has produced some OMOP data datavases, that you shpuld use. I hope SUlev can help to get access and guide in the process. Overall, for project, I believe the questions are:
overall SNOMED as used in OMOP - what is the structure. I believe there could also be different types of raletionships. In GO there is at least is-a, part-of, etc types. They all are on the ontology....
Where is our actual health data data mapped into OMOP on that structure (depths, widths, counts of actual mappings)
Aggregation of mapped data (individuals) along the paths upward on the structure... ( individual node that has parents - the same values shopuld be mapped to higher levels).
For woirking with sets of patients that have been mapped to each category, I believe it makes sense to immediately start using the Roaring Bitmaps - https://roaringbitmap.org/
If you assign for one node a set of patients, then working upward in the ontology, you can simply fo the UNION (avoid repetitive counting). It is also interesting to know how scaleble all is - can you build the index of individuals over SNOMED so that every node has a bitmap representing individuals with that annotation. First - as is in the data - that is smaller; and secondly, as worked upward through UNION - larger and larger.
Note that when working with such SNOMED it may well be that soimetimes we want to work with higher level concepts; sometimes with lower levels; sometimes perhaps the categories of the "ideal" work may be pregiven. But understanding fully the structure of the ontology and mappings, would help us design next steps. Additionally, you may have a look at some of the semantics; but at the moment I bvelieve the structure has been most important, that we do not understand within the group sufficiently at all.
Perhaps similar could later be done withICD, ATC, RxNorm, Visits, procedures... but for first project SNOMED is large enough beast.
I would avoid focusing on visualisations too much as this is hard and may drag attention away. If needed, you might want to learn Cytoscape and/or GraphViz. But the calculations are more important, so that we have some numeric support to our decisions on the "hot zone" that we should use in our analyses.

[text](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1Ttr3XHWgJcLo_8rmTZlka6mS2uvGlLCK)